---
layout: post
author: keiran  
title: "Nitrogen fixation, artificial lightning, bird poop, and how kudzu grew out of control"
subtitle: "How the Midwest was lost and where it got us"
category: biochemistry 
tags: nitrogen-fixation Haber-Bosch guano kudzu   
---

> Content notice: this post discusses the history and chemistry behind some of the worst chemical agents of World Wars I & II, but doesn't go into detail about the deaths. It also mentions a suicide, deaths in an industrial accident, and indefinite detention of migrants.  

*Nitrogen fixation is a subject I was taught about ever since high school chemistry, where the [Haber process](https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry_Textbook_Maps/Supplemental_Modules_(Physical_and_Theoretical_Chemistry)/Equilibria/Le_Chateliers_Principle/The_Haber_Process) was [part of the curriculum on equilibria](https://educationstandards.nsw.edu.au/wps/portal/nesa/11-12/stage-6-learning-areas/stage-6-science/chemistry-2017/content/2267). The book that influenced this current post the most is [The Alchemy of Air](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/73464/the-alchemy-of-air-by-thomas-hager-author-of-the-demon-under-the-microscope/), which details the life of Fritz Haber and Carl Bosch.

Carl Bosch was an industrialist unafraid to apply the highest pressures and the wildest materials in the search for a new catalyst. Bosch guided the German chemical conglomerates in 1930s that provided Germany chemical supplies in WWII (BASF and Bayer were denazified and thrive to this day). When the Nazis began to dictate to industry, Bosch was removed from his positions for speaking up against anti-Semitism. Fritz Haber was zealously loyal to imperial Germany, developing many horrific chemical warfare gases; a loyalty that horrified his pacifist wife who took her life following Haber's gas attacks on the battlefield, and ended up meaning nothing to the ascendant Nazi regime which attempted to erase his legacy because he was Jewish. Bosch and Haber were also involved in the early pushes for a synthetic dye industry (a subject for a later post).* 

---

### N≡N: The strongest bond in the air 

Nitrogen gas (N<sub>2</sub>) is the most common molecule in the atmosphere (~80%), yet it sits there inert, each nitrogen atom strongly bound to the other.  Because each nitrogen atom requires 3 electrons, the surrounding oxygen atoms can't easily fulfil nitrogen's bonding requirements since they only have 2 unpaired electrons, so the N≡N triple bond dominates the air. When nitrogen-oxygen bonds are made (mostly in car engines), the molecules that are formed (NO$$_x_$$) are at the top of the list of atmospheric pollutants. Despite N<sub>2</sub> being plentiful in the atmosphere, most of the biosphere is nitrogen starved. Nitrogen, in a form that is less strongly bound than N≡N, and hence bioaccessible, is crucial to provide organisms the feedstock for manufacturing the DNA and amino acids that build the complex machinery of cells. This is what fertilisers are for. Despite making up 4/5ths of the air, nitrogen is found in the soil at ~50-100 mg/kg (about 50 atoms out of every million), and this is because only a few bacteria and one industrial reaction generates bioacessible nitrogen from the air (a process known as nitrogen fixation). The industrial reaction to break the N≡N bond and form useful chemicals is one of the most energy-intensive reactions invented by humanity, and essential to our survival (*as will be explored below*).   

### N≡N + ⚡: the Promethean way to free nitrogen

It was at the beginning of the 20th century that humanity snapped the N≡N bond open through sheer energy, when the Norwegian hydro-electric Nitrogen stock company (*Hydro*) built the Vemork power plant. Vemork's world-leading 108 MW output was used to generate arcs of artificial lightning that split the surrounding N<sub>2</sub> and O<sub>2</sub> gases, overcoming the N≡N triple bond strength of 942 kJ/mol (twice that of oxygen gas). The split nitrogen and oxygen gases formed NO gas, which was shepherded along to produce feedstock nitric acid. 

This arc lightning process was so energy intensive that it was unable to compete economically when the alternative Haber-Bosch process, which requires only pressure and heat, was brought to industrial scale (*detailed below*). Vemork began producing other chemicals, including the side-product heavy water, D<sub>2</sub>O: H<sub>2</sub>O whose hydrogens are now deuterium (D) because they are 'heavier' by one neutron. D<sub>2</sub>O was critical in making nuclear energy and weapons (neutrons slow down when passing through heavy water, allowing to them to be absorbed into atoms which become nuclearly unstable). Vemork was the only site that produced heavy water. The Allies recognised this and exported D<sub>2</sub>O stockpiles out of the country, though *Hydro* management caved in and agreed to supply new heavy water after the Quisling government surrendered to the Nazis. This launched a sabotage mission by Norwegian resistance ski troops, an operation portrayed in the TV series [The Heavy Water War](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt3280150/).  

*Hydro* continues as Norway's renewable energy company and one of the largest global suppliers of aluminium. Norway's abundant hydro power is still [leveraged to this day to generate renewable energy](https://www.energy-storage.news/freyr-secures-renewable-power-supply-from-statkraft-for-first-two-gigafactories/). (*disclosure: I have an investment in Freyr because I think the enterprise is  a good thing for the world*). 


### N≡N + 🗜️: the brute force way to make NH<sub>3</sub> that's used to this day

Fixation of atmospheric nitrogen through electrical arcs was not viable almost anywhere else in the world. Bioaccessible nitrogen was needed to meet the fertiliser demands of mechanised agriculture, and mined supplies of nitrates in the form of niter (a mineral) or guano (bird droppings, *detailed below*) were not going to be able to meet demand. Research was underway for an alternative source of nitrogen, particularly in Germany which lacked niter deposits (a vulnerability that was exposed in WWI when the German navy was blockaded from colonies and foreign trade).

Commercially viable artificial nitrogen fixation was developed by Haber, Bosch, and others at BASF in 1909$$--$$1910. The development of the Haber-Bosch process for nitrogen fixation was largely down to brute force searching driven by need: a wide array for catalysts were tested (originally Os, later to be replaced by affordable Fe-based surfaces), and the industrial capabilities of Rhine were used to make the sturdiest metal walls to allow the reaction vessels to withstand the intense pressures (hundreds of times Earth's atmosphere) that were necessary to force nitrogen and hydrogen gases together into NH<sub>3</sub> (ammonia). The Allies never knocked out Germany's fertiliser and munitions production by bombing BASF's Haber-Bosch plant at Oppau, but the ammonium nitrate manufactured at Oppau was so dangerous that [more than 500 people died when ammonium nitrate plastered on the storage silo walls was detonated through the routine use of small explosive charges.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oppau_explosion).    

The Haber-Bosch process is used unchanged in its fundamentals today, consumes 1$$--$$2% of all the world's energy, and creates the fertilisers that provide nitrogen to crops that [sustain half the world's population](https://ourworldindata.org/how-many-people-does-synthetic-fertilizer-feed). Researchers have yet to create an alternative industrial process that can compete with bacteria that fix nitrogen under natural conditions (*detailed below*).   

### 🐦 + 💩: white gold of the seas

Nitrogen-containing mineral deposits are [often crystalised on cave walls](https://geographyfieldwork.com/Coves-del-Collbato.htm), and while 'niter' is a vague historical term for many minerals, it was potassium nitrate ('saltpeter') that was extensively mined for gunpowder and fertiliser. In these caves, it wasn't only the mineral deposits that were a source of nitrates, but also the bat dropping. The volume of bat poo available pales in comparison to islands covered in bird poo, which was harvested by people of the Andes mountain region who it called guano. Since nitrates dissolve in water, dry conditions were needed for rich guano deposits, so it only piled up in certain locations. In the 19th century, Europeans used their vast shipping infrastructure to run a guano industry that fervently extract hundreds of thousands of tonnes of the fertiliser for intensive agricultural use. This made intensive agriculture reliant on a few islands. This led to the [war between Spain and Peru for the Chincha guano islands](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chincha_Islands_War), and the importance of access to this region was exposed in Germany in WWI when their ships were blocked from reaching Peru (though the Haber-Bosch process alleviated this nitrogen shortage, *as detailed above*). 

Hard labour is still performed to extract guano from the droppings of 4 million birds on Peruvian islands, [where it is stacked in giant sacks among the throng of cormorants](https://www.audubon.org/news/holy-crap-trip-worlds-largest-guano-producing-islands). Guano was also vital to American farming; causing the to U.S. pass the Guano Islands Act, allowing any U.S. citizen who stumbles upon an uninhabited Guano island to [seize it on behalf of federal government](http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=018/llsl018.db&recNum=1152). The U.S. acquired many islands this way (often transiently, just to extract guano), including the Midway Atoll of the Battle of Midway fame. The Guano Islands Act is still in force, for any Americans brave enough to venture in search of new islands to claim. Australia has its own involvement in the administration of a guano island, Nauru, a 21 km$$^2$$ country whose economy collapsed once its guano was depleted. The Australian government uses the now guano-free land of Nauru for an offshore immigration processing centre, representing the most extreme outcome of Australia's [controversial indefinite detention laws](https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/projects/immigration-detention-and-human-rights). 


### N≡N + 🦠: the organic way to fertilise soil 

Pre-existing nitrogen in the soil has been put there by [nitrogen fixing bacteria roughly 2.5 billion years ago](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1165675), around the time the atmosphere became oxygen rich and [well before plants learned learned to breath](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.355.6330.1110). Nitrogen fixing bacteria contain [nitrogenase](https://pdb101.rcsb.org/motm/26): an enzyme that funnels electrons to a molecular-scale crucible of metal clusters where the N≡N bond is broken. While the structure of this 'crucible' has been [determined in exquisite detail](https://www.rcsb.org/structure/1n2c), to my knowledge *exactly* where and how famously unreactive N≡N binds inside nitrogenase is still a subtle molecular puzzle that is unsolved and actively debated by researchers. The efficiency of nitrogenase leaves molecular science embarrassed; what bacteria can do in the open air humans must still force through with electric arcs or hundreds of atmospheres of pressure. 

Some nitrogen fixing bacteria, known as rhizobia, require a plant host where they form nodules in the roots of legumes (beans, clover, peas, *etc*). Rhizobia feed legumes fixed nitrogen until their host dies, at which point rhizobia infect a new legume or return to the soil, providing bioaccessible nitrogen. This is the answer to the children's song, *"Do you, or I, or anyone know how oats, peas, beans, and barley grow?"*: legumes are included in the crop rotation to ensure the soil remains nitrogen-rich. Several other bacteria can fix nitrogen, including some blue-green algae which have a symbiotic relationship with many plants, including giant Rhubarb (*Gunnera manicata*); an example of which [can be found in the Tasmanian Botanic Gardens](../images/giant_rhubarb.jpg).  


### 🌿 Kudzu and the overrun of the American south 

Kudzu is a vine native to the Asia-Pacific and is a legume with a phenomenally successful symbiotic relationship with nitrogen fixing bacteria. Kudzu's hardiness and scrabbling tendrils make access to plentiful nitrogen supply via rhizobia a dangerous combination. Kudzu took root in the U.S. after being introduced both for its fashionable purple flowers and as fast growing fodder for livestock. Kudzu is capable of growing at a rate of a foot a day, and was declared a weed as it spread over the landscape, blocking the sun and smothering all below it. Kudzu's growth has been so efficient in the American South that kudzu engulfed entire settlements, as captured in eerie quiescence of [R.E.M's debut album cover](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/c/c0/R.E.M._-_Murmur.jpg). Kudzu's onward march appears unstoppable, and [the Midwest is set to be next](https://thehill.com/homenews/4025176-midwest-primed-to-be-next-frontier-for-invasive-plant-kudzu/).

### Research to improve nitrogen fixation 

As it stands, nitrogen fixation remains critical to global food supply, uses 1--2% of the world's energy (concomitantly producing [1--2% of human CO<sub>2</sub> emissions](https://www.iea.org/reports/ammonia-technology-roadmap/executive-summary), and underpins a roughly $60 billion ammonia industry. A fundamental change in how the world gets its nitrogen would be transformative. Some alternatives to the Haber-Bosch process could be:

- Human made, inorganic, nitrogen fixing catalysts 

- 'Green nitrogen' through applying the Haber-Bosch process in alternative ways  

- Coercing nature's pre-existing nitrogenases by using directed mutations 

- Developing new artificial nitrogen fixing enzymes using synthetic biology  

I have no expertise in this field, but there's plenty of literature on such approaches out there for those interested. 

For the approach of developing inorganic nitrogen fixing catalysts, a [recent review](https://doi.org/10.1039/D0CS01341B) surveys the staggering diversity of metals (Mo, Re, V, Zr, Ti, ...) and structures investigated for potential catalysts, of which only Mo-based catalysts work under ambient conditions. Breakthroughs in the use of inorganic nitrogen fixing catalysts will come when there is a combination of: an inexpensive (relative to catalytic gain) metal, [such as Fe](https://www.nature.com/articles/nchem.690) which is the key metal inside nitrogenase; use of H<sub>2</sub>O as a hydrogen source; and functioning under ambient conditions. If these developments could be achieved, commercial scale nitrogen fixation could be achieved without huge industrial plants.   

For ['green ammonia'](https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/low-carbon-energy-programme/green-ammonia/), the Haber-Bosch process is itself efficient at combining hydrogen and nitrogen gas industrial plants could contain high pressures. Renewable energy could therefore be best directed to power gas compressors, and split H<sub>2</sub>O for a source of hydrogen it is the use of fossil fuels as a hydrogen source that most contributes to the CO<sub>2</sub> emissions of the Haber-Bosch process. It [has been estimated](https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EE02873K)) that an electricity driven Haber-Bosch process will be cheaper and involve less energy loss than the fossil fuel based status quo.  

It could be possible to selectively mutate sections of existing nitrogenases (in a process known as 'directed mutagenesis') to increase the efficiency of the enzyme. I can't easily find any literature on improvements to nitrogenases through mutagenesis, which suprises me since the technique has been around for a while, so I suspect the structure of nitrogenase is so finely tuned to N<sub>2</sub> that most site mutations kill the enzyme's efficiency. Mutagenesis was, however, [used on nitrogenase in the 1980s](https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/low-carbon-energy-programme/green-ammonia/) to show that nitrogenase ceases to fixing nitrogen when crucial components (specific amino acids) are replaced, and that nitroganse still feeds cells when only the Fe-containing (not the MoFe-containing) 'crucible' section is active. In fact, nitrogen fixing bacteria have a range of [nitrogenases using alternative metals](https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007/978-1-4939-8864-8_1) when Mo is not available in the environment.   


As for [entirely new artificial enzymes](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.0630028100), I don't know if this has been achieved by anyone, but one approach has been to [combine parts of the nitrogenase system from different bacteria by exchanging gene segments](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-016-0442-6). I don't have enough working molecular biology knowledge to fruitfully read the nitty-gritty of these papers, but a key result is that [hooking up the electron transport infrastructure](https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1620058114) from one type of bacteria to the nitrogenase of another can lead to greater efficiency. Gains can also be made by doing things like [turning off the regulatory networks that monitor nitrogen production in a cell](https://academic.oup.com/jxb/article/71/15/4591/5817768).

---

*Despite N<sub>2</sub> being abundant and simple in structure, it has underpinned entire ecosystems, determined wars, and continues to escape the complete control of chemists. It may be worth reflecting on N<sub>2</sub>, the particle you collide with the most throughout your life, the next time you eat your (likely fertiliser grown) rice or toast in the morning.*    
